[MUSIC PLAYING]
JEREMY: Hi, Graham.
Welcome to Glasgow.
Good to see you.
We should give your official
title, Professor Hutton.
Now I think you
teach first years
to program in Haskell in
Nottingham University,
don't you?
GRAHAM HUTTON: Yes.
JEREMY: Do you think Haskell is a
good first programming language
to learn?
GRAHAM HUTTON: I think I think
it depends on the individual.
What we find in Nottingham
is some people who've
done lots of
programming before, it's
kind of hard to
unwire their brain
and get them to forget the
imperative, loop-based,
variable-based way of thinking.
JEREMY: Which is
totally different
to our functional style.
GRAHAM HUTTON: Which
is totally different.
And it takes a while for
them to undo their brain.
Whereas some people who have
never seen any programming
language before, they can
get into the Haskell way
of thinking straight away.
And what we tend
to find is people
who can think
abstractly, they're
the ones who can pick
it up very, very easily.
JEREMY: Yeah.
OK.
So there are certain
notions that people really
struggle with like recursion,
for instance or other kinds
of functional concepts that you
wouldn't see in an imperative
language so readily.
What do you do when people
say, I don't get this?
How do you kind of coax them
into a functional mind set?
GRAHAM HUTTON: So I've
thought about this
for quite a long
time because I've
been teaching Haskell
to the first years
and second years
for about 20 years.
What I do with the
students is three things.
I say you should be very
systematic about your learning.
So when I teach
Haskell, I teach it
in a very kind of
language-focused way
at the start.
So I teach the very
basic concepts,
the functions, list
comprehensions,
recursion, and so on.
And I very much see
this as a tower.
You learn the simple things,
then a little bit more,
and then a little bit more.
And the second thing I
do to the students is
say you must actually look at
larger programming examples.
So in the new book, I've got
about 20 larger programming
examples.
And I go through some of
those with the students.
And they see kind of code
written by somebody who's
been doing this a long time.
And I hope it gets
them up to speed.
And last thing, of course,
I say to the students
is you need to do a lot
of programming yourself.
So we sent them lots and
lots of exercises in the labs
and with course-works and so on.
And they build up to writing
larger programs themselves.
JEREMY: I think that's good.
There's got to be a
balance between reading
code and writing code yourself.
GRAHAM HUTTON: Yes.
JEREMY: Both things
are important--
GRAHAM HUTTON: Absolutely.
JEREMY: --to build an
understanding of language.
That's good.
That's what we're trying
to do in our course.
Now you mentioned
your new book there.
This is the Glasgow
leg of your book tour.
GRAHAM HUTTON: Yes.
JEREMY: Can you tell us
something about your Haskell
textbook?
GRAHAM HUTTON: Yes.
So this is the new
book, which is just out.
So I've been teaching
Haskell for 20 years.
So I've got lots of
experience with this.
And I love Haskell.
And I love teaching
it to people.
And I want everyone
to learn Haskell.
So that's why I've produced
a second edition of the book.
It's divided into two parts.
It's got some
introductory material
in the first half of the book.
JEREMY: So you could
pick up this book
if you weren't a programmer or
you haven't done programming
before?
GRAHAM HUTTON: Absolutely.
So the book is aimed
at basically anybody.
So what it says in the preface
is anybody over the age of 16
with a reasonable aptitude
for scientific ideas
could pick up a book like this
and learn some Haskell from it.
So it's not necessarily aimed
at professional programmers
or students or laypeople.
It's aimed at basically anybody.
So one half focuses
on the basics.
And it does it in this
very systematic way,
which I was talking about.
So it covers the very basics
of types and functions and list
comprehensions and so on.
And it builds up to
more complicated things.
And then the second
half of the book
covers some of the more
advanced topics that
might be in, for
example, a second course
on functional programming
like reasoning about programs,
programming with monads,
with applicative functors,
with functors, foldables, traversables.
All the kind of newer
stuff in Haskell.
JEREMY: OK.
Good.
So a recommended read.
In Nottingham, you've got a
functional programming lab.
GRAHAM HUTTON: Yes
JEREMY: And you have
large team of people--
GRAHAM HUTTON: Yes.
JEREMY: --working
with you there.
GRAHAM HUTTON: Yes.
JEREMY: What is it
about Haskell that
is particularly attractive
in terms of research,
a vehicle for doing interesting
programming language
experiments?
GRAHAM HUTTON: That's
a very good question.
So I think for me,
it's the balance
of being a very nice
theoretical vehicle for studying
programming language principles
and kind of advancing that.
But it's also, on the other
hand, a very practical language
for writing real
world applications.
And I think that's one
of the things which
is very exciting about
the Haskell community.
I mean it's been going
for about 30 years.
And for the first
maybe 15 or so years,
it was very much an
academic pursuit.
And people like me were
interested in writing
academic papers about Haskell.
And in the last 15 years and
really in the last five years,
things have really taken off.
And people who have no interest
in this kind of language
technology are now
getting interested in it.
And it's become one
of the hot languages
that people want to learn.
There's quite a few jobs now.
And we tell our students now
that there's a realistic chance
if they want that they can get
a job in Haskell afterwards.
So it's a really nice
language to do research
on because it's both at the
cutting edge of programming
language research and also at
the cutting edge of practice.
I mean people in
the real big players
like the Facebooks, the
Googles, the Microsofts,
they're writing real production
software now using this cutting
edge language technology.
So it's a really nice
research field to be in.
JEREMY: I want to pick up on
something you mentioned there
about the sense of
community around Haskell
and functional programming.
I get the impression
that there does
seem to be more of a kind of
gregarious and social nature
to the Haskell community and
online forums and news groups
and so on.
Have you picked up on that?
And if so, why?
Why is functional
programming so friendly?
GRAHAM HUTTON: Absolutely.
I mean that's one of the
reasons I became a functional
programmer.
My PhD wasn't in that area.
And I migrated to
that afterwards.
And it was partly because it
was such a friendly community.
I mean there's lots of things
going on, lots of forums,
lots of newsgroups, meet
ups, and things like that.
It's a really nice
community to be part of.
And I think the
reason it's developed
like that is that it grew
out from a core of about 20
or so people who
started the Haskell
language about 30 years ago.
And they all shared
this common vision.
And they're all very
nice people as well.
And as the community has
grown, they've wanted
to keep this ethos, I think.
So I think it's that the
people who started it
were very nice and very,
very clever people.
And they wanted to keep
that kind of nice community
as a group.
JEREMY: That's a
good atmosphere.
So people who use
programming languages
turn out like the people
who invented the programming
languages.
[LAUGHTER]
Very good.
OK.
Last question.
This is about maybe a fun or
interesting Haskell application
that you've developed.
Can you tell us something
about a large piece of code
that you've written in Haskell
that's just something cool?
GRAHAM HUTTON: So I think
the one I'd pick up on
is actually one that's in the
book, fortuitously enough,
which is the countdown problem.
And the idea is you're given
a collection of numbers, maybe
six numbers.
And you're given
the target number.
And you need to build
a simple arithmetic
expression that evaluates
to that target number.
And I use this as an
example in the book
because it kind of illustrates
many of the interesting things
about functional programming.
So what I do in the
book is I start off
with a kind of high
level specification
for what it means to
solve this problem.
And then in a series
of simple steps,
I show how you can end up with
an extremely efficient program
that can solve any
of these number games
as soon as you basically
hit the Return key.
So I think, for me,
this is a nice example
of functional programming.
Because it takes a
problem which everyone
is familiar with-- a simple
numbers game from the TV--
and it shows how, in
a very systematic way,
you can write a very,
very efficient program
to solve it and end
up with something
quite interesting to look
at and fun to look at.
And I've been
teaching that example
to my first years
for many years.
And they always find
this one quite engaging.
JEREMY: Yeah.
That's nice.
So we're saying Haskell
is both fun and elegant.
GRAHAM HUTTON: Well, it's
fun, elegant, and practical.
That's why it's such a nice
field to be in at the moment.
JEREMY: Thanks, Graham.
GRAHAM HUTTON: Thanks
very much, Jeremy.
[MUSIC PLAYING]